OPEN PROBLEMS IN NUMERICAL LINEAR ALGEBRA                                                           MI-22




Matrix inequalities and norms


Lemos–Soares singular-value log-majorization
Diﬀiculty: challenging       Importance: interesting to the community
Status: Lean verified

Rating rationale: Controlling every partial product of singular values is challenging despite the proved
eigenvalue-modulus analogue; the resulting norm comparisons are relevant across matrix analysis.

Resolution — 2026-09-11

Negative result by Matthew J. Colbrook, Department of Applied Mathematics and Theoretical Physics,
University of Cambridge. Independent proof review: PASS.
Rational positive definite 3 × 3 matrices at 𝑡 = 1/8 violate the first singular-value inequality: the left
operator norm exceeds 10900, while ‖𝐴𝐵‖2 < 10200. Exact rational root residuals and a proved operator-
root error bound certify the actual principal powers.
The exact target is resolved. The original statement and source evidence are retained below; its former
diﬀiculty rating is historical.
Primary manuscript: complete proof PDF, standalone TeX, Theorem 1.1 and its proof; authorship and
scope. The independent review checks the full original argument and records its hash. The draft was AI-
assisted; this is independent agent verification, not external human peer review or formal certification.
Submission record.

Lean proof and verification evidence — 2026-09-12

Lean formalization: George Stepaniants, Department of Computing and Mathematical Sciences, Cal-
ifornia Institute of Technology, Pasadena, California, USA, with AI-agent assistance. Matthew J. Col-
brook retains credit for the original negative resolution and mathematical method.
The immutable Solution proves the complete original universal statement false. All complex positive-
definite inputs, all positive dimensions, every 𝑡 ∈ [0, 1], every proper singular-value prefix and full-
product equality remain in the reviewed definitions. The formal counterexample uses the disclosed ex-
act rational adaptation 𝐵 = 𝐷𝑇 8 𝐷 and 𝑡 = 1/8. Its actual left operator norm exceeds 11000 and its actual
𝐴𝐵 norm is below 10500. Colbrook’s printed integer 𝐵, root-residual theorem and original 10900/10200
bounds remain informal source results; they are not claimed as this formalization’s witness.
The eight checked declarations, in namespace NLA.MI22, are:
 • singular_values_semantics
 • spectral_power_semantics
 • euclidean_norm_bounds
 • witness_rational_data
 • witness_principal_powers
 • witness_operator_gap
 • counterexample
 • not_weightedLogMajorizationConjecture
They prove genuine Mathlib CFC powers, descending singular values with multiplicities, Euclidean
operator-norm bridges, every rational witness obligation, and the actual first-prefix reversal, followed
by the full negation. Two independent agents reviewed the frozen statements and complete proof.
Linux run 34720684925 matched all eight exports with Lean4 Comparator and replayed the solution
through Lean’s default kernel. The independent operational audit retains the original artifacts, com-
plete 177-input identity and both exercised sandbox/rejection control suites. All 17 internal/public
axiom reports use only propext, Classical.choice and Quot.sound; the solution contains no admissions or
native execution trust.

Editorial ratings; a bounded search cannot certify that a problem remains unsolved.
Literature check: 2026-09-12                                                                            1
OPEN PROBLEMS IN NUMERICAL LINEAR ALGEBRA                                                            MI-22




This catalog reviewed the actual remote Linux execution and separately retained local macOS re-
elaborations. Ten pinned dependency checkouts were fresh; the oﬀicial Mathlib cache was used, so a
complete dependency-source rebuild is not claimed. The reviews are by independent AI agents, not ex-
ternal human peer review or source-author endorsement. Statement referees establish correspondence
with the prose; Comparator checks formal identity and kernel trust.
The proof pins Lean 4.33.1, Mathlib 0df444a and LeanCert 621a43d. LeanCert certifies only the retained
strict scalar comparison 10500 < 11000, in explicit kernel mode on a singleton. Exact matrix algebra
and true root/norm proofs cover all other obligations, without interval subdivision. The project guide,
source correspondence, locked dependencies and formalization manifest record the full scope.
From the verified revision, on an isolated non-root Linux host satisfying the shared harness prerequi-
sites, run:

tools/lean/bootstrap.sh /absolute/path/to/nla-lean-tools
tools/lean/selftest.sh /absolute/path/to/nla-lean-tools
tools/lean/verify.sh \
  matrix-inequalities-and-norms/MI-22/lean \
  /absolute/path/to/nla-lean-tools


Problem statement

Let 𝐴, 𝐵 ∈ ℂ𝑛×𝑛 be positive definite and 𝑡 ∈ [0, 1], and define 𝐴#𝑡 𝐵 = 𝐴1/2 (𝐴−1/2 𝐵𝐴−1/2 )𝑡 𝐴1/2 . Write
𝑠1 (𝑋) ≥ ⋯ ≥ 𝑠𝑛 (𝑋) for the singular values of 𝑋.
Does

                                    𝑘                             𝑘
                                  ∏ 𝑠𝑗 (𝐴𝑡 (𝐴#𝑡 𝐵)𝐵1−𝑡 ) ≤ ∏ 𝑠𝑗 (𝐴𝐵),                 1 ≤ 𝑘 < 𝑛,
                                  𝑗=1                            𝑗=1


hold for every positive integer 𝑛, every such 𝐴, 𝐵, 𝑡, with equality of the products for 𝑘 = 𝑛? This is the
assertion 𝑠(𝐴𝑡 (𝐴#𝑡 𝐵)𝐵1−𝑡 ) ≺log 𝑠(𝐴𝐵). The positive semidefinite version in the sources is recovered by
continuous regularization 𝐴 + 𝜀𝐼, 𝐵 + 𝜀𝐼; endpoints in 𝑡 can be stated directly.
The question concerns the singular values of a product involving a matrix geometric mean. Such mul-
tiplicative bounds imply norm and determinant estimates useful in numerical treatment of positive
definite matrices. An analogue for eigenvalue moduli has already been proved, but changes both sides
of the comparison and does not answer this singular-value question.

References

1. M. M. Ghabries, H. Abbas, B. Mourad and A. Assi, New log-majorization results concerning eigenvalues
   and singular values and a complement of a norm inequality, Linear Multilinear Algebra 71 (2023), 1228–
   1243; preprint Conjecture 1.1, p. 3, and §3. Full preprint; published article.
2. J. Shi, Z. Wang and C. Wei, Log-majorizations of Lemos–Soares type for the metric geometric and spectral
   geometric means, Ann. Funct. Anal. 17 (2026), article 53, p. 3, equation (1.2) and the following
   open-status statement. Publisher; publicly indexed full-text mirror.
Status check (2026-09-10): the original arXiv record lists v1. The July 14, 2026 paper reproduces pre-
cisely this inequality as (1.2) on p. 3 and explicitly says that it is still open. The publisher PDF was
inaccessible, but the indexed primary-paper text in the public mirror exposed this passage and the later
discussion distinguishing the new partial results. Searches for “Lemos Soares singular log-majorization
conjecture”, the exact later title, and 2025/2026 found no subsequent announced full resolution. This is
a bounded search, not certification of openness.




Editorial ratings; a bounded search cannot certify that a problem remains unsolved.
Literature check: 2026-09-12                                                                             2
