OPEN PROBLEMS IN NUMERICAL LINEAR ALGEBRA                                                            MI-23




Matrix inequalities and norms


Corrected generalized geometric-mean product
conjecture
Diﬀiculty: challenging       Importance: interesting to specialist
Status: Lean verified

Rating rationale: The four interacting exponents make this corrected conjecture challenging; its imme-
diate consequences concern specialists in matrix means and log-majorization.

Lean proof and verification evidence - 2026-09-12

The complete corrected MI-23 conjecture is false, with a Lean-verified counterexample. The rational
complex positive-definite witness has 𝑟 = 𝑠 = 1, 𝑝 = 2, 𝑡 = 1/8 and violates the first ordered eigenvalue
inequality. The proof at revision 17194f9 preserves every original dimension, both real 𝑟, 𝑠 regions,
actual CFC matrix powers, all proper prefix products and equality of complete products.
Mathematical counterexample and informal proof: Matthew J. Colbrook, Department of Applied
Mathematics and Theoretical Physics, University of Cambridge. Lean formalization: George Stepa-
niants, Department of Computing and Mathematical Sciences, California Institute of Technology,
Pasadena, California, USA, with AI-agent assistance.
The eight checked exports, each with prefix NLA.MI23., are:
 • positive_powers_and_means: genuine CFC powers and generalized means are positive definite.
 • product_eigenvalue_semantics: complete characteristic roots with multiplicities, positivity, ordering,
   similarity and determinant product.
 • squared_product_largest: the actual largest root of 𝑋 2 𝑌 2 equals ‖𝑋𝑌‖22 .
 • operator_norm_bounds: entry and Frobenius bounds for the genuine Euclidean operator norm.
 • witness_data: admissibility and all actual CFC witness identities.
 • witness_squared_gap: the exact rational gap and strict operator-norm separation.
 • counterexample: failure of the original log-majorization relation at the admissible witness.
 • not_generalizedGeometricMeanConjecture: negation of the complete universal conjecture.
Two independent agents reviewed the frozen statements and completed proof. Linux run 34716784038
matched all eight exports using the sandboxed Comparator and replayed the solution in Lean’s default
kernel. The original artifacts and independent operational audit bind all 133 verified source inputs and
both actual isolation and rejection-control suites. All 64 internal/public transitive axiom reports contain
only propext, Classical.choice and Quot.sound. These are independent agent reviews, without a claim of
external human peer review.
The proof pins Lean 4.33.1, LeanCert 621a43d and Mathlib 0df444a. Exact integer-power identities
replace fractional-power approximation. One kernel-mode LeanCert certificate proves the positive ra-
tional gap and remains in the final norm and eigenvalue contradiction. See the manifest, dependency
pins and numerical targets. From the verified revision on a documented non-root Linux host, reproduce
with:

tools/lean/bootstrap.sh /absolute/path/to/nla-lean-tools
tools/lean/selftest.sh /absolute/path/to/nla-lean-tools
tools/lean/verify.sh \
  matrix-inequalities-and-norms/MI-23/lean \
  /absolute/path/to/nla-lean-tools

This settles the corrected eigenvalue conjecture stated below. The earlier singular-value conjecture is a
different target. The original problem and historical informal proof remain intact.

Editorial ratings; a bounded search cannot certify that a problem remains unsolved.
Literature check: 2026-09-12                                                                             1
OPEN PROBLEMS IN NUMERICAL LINEAR ALGEBRA                                                                  MI-23




Resolution — 2026-09-11

Negative result by Matthew J. Colbrook, Department of Applied Mathematics and Theoretical Physics,
University of Cambridge. Independent proof review: PASS.
Rational positive definite 3 × 3 matrices with 𝑟 = 𝑠 = 1, 𝑝 = 2 and 𝑡 = 1/8 violate the corrected eigen-
value log-majorization conjecture. An exact integer-power construction and rational norm separation
establish failure of the first ordered eigenvalue inequality.
The exact target is resolved. The original statement and source evidence are retained below; its former
diﬀiculty rating is historical.
Primary manuscript: complete proof PDF, standalone TeX, Theorem 1.1 and its proof; authorship and
scope. The independent review checks the full original argument and records its hash. The draft was
AI-assisted; the 2026-09-11 review was independent agent verification, without external human peer
review or formal certification. The later Lean verification above covers the complete corrected target.
Submission record.

Problem statement

For positive definite 𝐴, 𝐵 ∈ ℂ𝑛×𝑛 , real 𝑟, and 𝑡 ∈ [0, 1], define

                                          𝐺𝑟,𝑡 (𝐴, 𝐵) = 𝐴𝑟/2 (𝐴−1/2 𝐵𝐴−1/2 )𝑡 𝐴𝑟/2 .

Is it true, for every 𝑛 ≥ 1, every such 𝐴, 𝐵, every 𝑝 ≥ 1, 𝑡 ∈ [0, 1], and either 𝑟, 𝑠 ≥ 1 or 𝑟, 𝑠 ≤ 0, that

                                   𝜆(𝐺𝑟,𝑡 (𝐴, 𝐵)𝑝 𝐺𝑠,1−𝑡 (𝐴, 𝐵)𝑝 ) ≺log 𝜆(𝐴𝑝(𝑟+𝑠−1) 𝐵𝑝 )?

The eigenvalues of these products are positive real numbers, ordered decreasingly: each product is
                                                                                                   𝑘
similar to a positive definite matrix. For positive decreasing vectors 𝑥, 𝑦 ∈ ℝ𝑛 , 𝑥 ≺log 𝑦 means ∏𝑗=1 𝑥𝑗 ≤
   𝑘
∏𝑗=1 𝑦𝑗 for 1 ≤ 𝑘 < 𝑛, with equality at 𝑘 = 𝑛.
This compares nonlinear matrix-mean products with products of powers of the input matrices. It
would give simultaneous multiplicative control for every partial product of ordered eigenvalues and
strengthen norm estimates used with positive definite matrix functions.




Editorial ratings; a bounded search cannot certify that a problem remains unsolved.
Literature check: 2026-09-12                                                                                   2
OPEN PROBLEMS IN NUMERICAL LINEAR ALGEBRA                                                            MI-23




References

1. M. M. Ghabries, H. Abbas, B. Mourad and A. Assi, New log-majorization results concerning eigenvalues
   and singular values and a complement of a norm inequality, preprint (2021), Conjecture 2.1, p. 6. PDF.
2. M. M. Ghabries, Contributions to Matrix Inequalities and Some Applications, PhD thesis, University
   of Angers and Lebanese University (2022), final Open Problems, Problem 6, pp. 109–110. Thesis
   uploaded by its author.
3. M. M. Ghabries, A log-majorization inequality for normal matrices with applications to determinantal in-
   equalities and geometric means (2026), §4. Full text.
Status check (2026-09-10): Theorem 2.1 and equation (13) of the first source prove a substantive in-
                                            𝑟(𝑝−1)         𝑟𝑝+𝑠
cluded region: 𝑟, 𝑠 ≥ 1, 1 ≤ 𝑝 ≤ 2, and (𝑟+𝑠)𝑝 ≤ 𝑡 ≤ (𝑟+𝑠)𝑝 . This includes 𝑝 = 1 for all 𝑡. The full
parameter range is the remaining question. The first source refutes its earlier unrestricted singular-
value Conjecture 1.2; the statement here is the explicitly proposed replacement. The thesis retains it.
The July 2026 paper concerns eigenvalue products of ordinary weighted means and does not claim this
full 𝑟, 𝑠, 𝑝 statement. Current arXiv versions and searches for the authors, “Conjecture 2.1 generalized
geometric mean” and 2025/2026 yielded no full resolution. This is a bounded check, not certification
of openness.




Editorial ratings; a bounded search cannot certify that a problem remains unsolved.
Literature check: 2026-09-12                                                                             3
