OPEN PROBLEMS IN NUMERICAL LINEAR ALGEBRA                                                               RA-20




Randomized and low-rank approximation


Critical-point counts for symmetric rank-two
approximation with diagonal zeros
Diﬀiculty: challenging       Importance: interesting to specialist
Status: Lean verified

Topic: Symmetric structured low-rank approximation
Rating rationale: Historical rating of the proposed all-order formulas. The negative resolution below
is elementary; it does not establish corrected formulas in the remaining cases.

Negative resolution - 2026-09-11
The displayed universal conjecture is false: 𝑒3,3 = 3, whereas its formula gives 4. For 𝑛 = 𝑠 = 3, write
the off-diagonal entries as (𝑎, 𝑏, 𝑐). The determinant is 2𝑎𝑏𝑐, so the variety is the union of three coordinate
planes. Each smooth component has exactly one simple critical point for generic full-Frobenius data.
Their intersections are singular and are excluded by the definition below.
Complete proof · Proof PDF · Standalone TeX · Independent audit and exact verification.
This counterexample was identified and independently checked during the Codex maintainer audit.
That dated audit was automated-agent review. The separate Lean verification below certifies the com-
plete original negative target; external human peer review is not claimed. The source’s Table 7 repeats
the value 4; this is not a transcription error in the entry. The complete original target, including its
dimension range and all four formulas, is retained below. No conclusion about corrected formulas or
the other parameter cases is claimed, and no priority claim is made.

Lean proof and verification evidence - 2026-09-13
Formalization: George Stepaniants, Department of Computing and Mathematical Sciences, California
Institute of Technology, Pasadena, California, USA, with AI-agent assistance. The Codex automated
maintainer audit retains credit for the original negative resolution; Kubjas, Sodomaco and Tsigaridas
retain credit for the conjecture.
The proof at immutable revision 43603b17 proves NLA.RA20.not_criticalCountConjecture: the full orig-
inal four-formula conjecture is false, since the genuine generic count at 𝑛 = 𝑠 = 3 is three, not its
predicted four. The original complex field, symmetry, rank bound, zero-diagonal constraints, bilinear
full-Frobenius metric and all quantifiers remain. The other formulas are not separately settled.
All twelve checked exports have namespace NLA.RA20:
 • hollow_variety_semantics; reduced_coordinate_ring.
 • algebraic_smooth_locus; algebraic_tangent_space.
 • full_frobenius_differential; hollow_distance_semantics.
 • generic_critical_locus; component_hessians.
 • generic_data_intersection; generic_count_three.
 • generic_count_not_four; not_criticalCountConjecture.
The definitions use the actual reduced coordinate ring modulo the entire vanishing ideal, its genuine
algebraic smooth locus and whole-ideal tangent space, actual complex derivatives, and the cardinality
of the full smooth critical-point subtype. Arbitrary nonempty generic opens are compared on the com-
plete symmetric data space. Every bridge and every premise needed to refute the target is proved, with
no new unproved literature assumption. The proof map, exact contracts and metadata, and detailed
proof scope identify the correspondence. Exact algebra eliminates interval computations; LeanCert
audits kernel trust. The source comment describing a complete local ring denotes ordinary Localiza-
tion.AtPrime, not an adic completion. Hessian nondegeneracy is proved; no separate scheme-theoretic
multiplicity theorem is claimed.

Editorial ratings; a bounded search cannot certify that a problem remains unsolved.
Literature check: 2026-09-13                                                                                 1
OPEN PROBLEMS IN NUMERICAL LINEAR ALGEBRA                                                           RA-20




Two independent statement reviews preceded implementation; two independent final mathematical
reviews and independent packaging review passed. This catalog ran Ubuntu workflow 34743832047
on 13 September 2026 and reviewed its original artifacts. The real Comparator matched all twelve ex-
ports without definition holes, and Lean’s default kernel replayed the solution. All 61 LeanCert kernel
assertions passed; 57 source axiom reports, covering 45 distinct names, contain only propext, Classi-
cal.choice and Quot.sound. Both real control suites passed as a non-root user, including invalid-proof,
statement-mismatch, quotient and forbidden-axiom rejection. All 17 workflow jobs succeeded. The in-
dependent operational report, original successful log and artifacts, and coordinator acceptance bind all
1,092 candidate inputs. Local macOS development checks are separate.
The checked toolchain is Lean 4.33.1. Dependency revisions are:
 • Mathlib: 0df444a360eaa60ab8c11dca51a86af692955474.
 • LeanCert: 621a43d7cf21f87872392a01e874f2f1dbddc926.
The Lake manifest pins all ten dependencies. The fresh proof build used 8,690 oﬀicial matching Mathlib
cache files, rather than rebuilding all dependencies from source. To reproduce from a clean checkout
of revision 43603b173beb294c2588d83f936a8a96246fd5f0, use a non-root Linux host with the documented
prerequisites and run from the repository root:

tools/lean/bootstrap.sh /tmp/nla-ra20-check
tools/lean/selftest.sh /tmp/nla-ra20-check
tools/lean/verify.sh \
  randomized-and-low-rank-approximation/RA-20/lean \
  /tmp/nla-ra20-check

These commands run the actual controls, Comparator, permitted-axiom checks and default-kernel re-
play. A local lake build Solution is a separate development check; the historical default build target is
Challenge. All original statement and source material below remains unchanged.

Statement

For 𝑠 ∈ {1, 2, 3, 4} and 𝑛 ≥ max{3, 𝑠}, define

                          𝑊𝑛,𝑠 = {𝑋 ∈ ℂ𝑛×𝑛 ∶ 𝑋 T = 𝑋, rank 𝑋 ≤ 2, 𝑥11 = ⋯ = 𝑥𝑠𝑠 = 0}.

For generic symmetric 𝑈 ∈ ℂ𝑛×𝑛 , let 𝑒𝑛,𝑠 be the number of complex critical points on the smooth locus
of 𝑊𝑛,𝑠 of

                                       𝑑𝑈 (𝑋) = ∑(𝑥𝑖𝑖 − 𝑢𝑖𝑖 )2 + 2 ∑(𝑥𝑖𝑗 − 𝑢𝑖𝑗 )2 .
                                                     𝑖                     𝑖<𝑗


Generic means outside a proper algebraic exceptional set. A point is critical if the differential vanishes
on its tangent space. Thus 𝑒𝑛,𝑠 is the Euclidean distance degree for the bilinear extension of the full
Frobenius metric; the off-diagonal terms have weight two, and complex conjugation is absent.
Conjecture (Kubjas–Sodomaco–Tsigaridas, Conjecture 5.6, 𝑛 ≥ 3).

                                                     ⎧3(𝑛 − 1) − 2,              𝑠 = 1,
                                                     {
                                                     {
                                                     {9(𝑛 − 2) − 2,              𝑠 = 2,
                                              𝑒𝑛,𝑠 = ⎨
                                                     {27(𝑛 − 3) + 4,             𝑠 = 3,
                                                     {
                                                     {81(𝑛 − 4) + 28,            𝑠 = 4.
                                                     ⎩

All four zero counts form one target. The explicit 𝑛 ≥ 3 restriction avoids a degenerate endpoint in the
printed statement: when 𝑛 = 2, the rank bound is vacuous and both possible varieties are linear with
ED degree one, whereas the displayed 𝑠 = 2 formula does not apply.

Editorial ratings; a bounded search cannot certify that a problem remains unsolved.
Literature check: 2026-09-13                                                                            2
OPEN PROBLEMS IN NUMERICAL LINEAR ALGEBRA                                                         RA-20




Evidence and numerical significance

The source’s Table 7 reports values matching its formulas through order ten, but the 𝑛 = 𝑠 = 3 value
conflicts with the exact calculation above. The table therefore cannot establish the conjecture’s valid-
ity. The problem counts stationary candidates for symmetric Frobenius approximation with prescribed
diagonal zeros. It concerns fixed rank two, unlike corank-one approximation in general square matrices.

References and status check

 • K. Kubjas, L. Sodomaco and E. Tsigaridas, Exact solutions in low-rank approximation with zeros, Linear
   Algebra and its Applications 641 (2022), 67–97. DOI; current author manuscript, 29 January 2022.
   Conjecture 5.6 and Table 7, manuscript p.21; §2 and §5 supply the distance convention.
The initial literature search on 2026-09-11 found no later resolution and compared the formulas with
Table 7. The subsequent independent maintainer audit supplied the counterexample above, supersed-
ing the initial Open classification. Excluding 𝑛 = 2 does not remove the admissible counterexample
𝑛 = 𝑠 = 3. The separate nonsymmetric formulas in Conjecture 5.2 have a table/label discrepancy and
are not imported here. The permanent ID, original target and canonical path are retained.




Editorial ratings; a bounded search cannot certify that a problem remains unsolved.
Literature check: 2026-09-13                                                                           3
