OPEN PROBLEMS IN NUMERICAL LINEAR ALGEBRA                                                           IV-06




Intervals and absolute value equations


Number of components of a real interval
eigenvalue set
Diﬀiculty: challenging       Importance: interesting to specialist
Status: Lean verified

Rating rationale: Controlling the topology of the real spectrum for nonsymmetric uncertain matrices
appears to require new analysis, warranting challenging. The component-count bound primarily ad-
vances specialist interval spectral enclosure theory.
Area: interval linear algebra; eigenvalue computation

Independently reviewed resolution - 2026-09-11

Negative resolution. Theorem 1 gives a 3 × 3 independent-entry interval matrix with at least four com-
ponents in its real eigenvalue set. Four exact integer eigenpairs at −3, 0, 3, 25 and excluded separators
−1, 1, 12 refute the universal at-most-𝑛 conjecture. No symmetry assumption is introduced, and locat-
ing every component endpoint is unnecessary.
Author: Matthew J. Colbrook, Department of Applied Mathematics and Theoretical Physics, University
of Cambridge. See the complete manuscript, independent agent review and submission record. The
source archive identifies the drafts as AI-generated; authorship is recorded at the submitter’s request.
That original agent review was informal; the later Lean verification is documented below. External
human peer review is not claimed.
The diﬀiculty, importance and rating rationale below are historical assessments of the original open
target. The original statement and dated audits are preserved.

Lean proof and verification evidence - 2026-09-12

The complete original component-bound conjecture is Lean verified with a negative answer. The
proof at revision 18b5ef3 proves that the unchanged dimension-three source box has at least four ac-
tual connected components. It retains the full independent-entry interval family, genuine nonzero
real eigenvectors and the topology of the attained real-eigenvalue subset. Component cardinality is
the actual Cardinal of ConnectedComponents; no finiteness, symmetry or all-real-spectrum assumption is
added.
Lean formalization: George Stepaniants, Department of Computing and Mathematical Sciences, Cal-
ifornia Institute of Technology, Pasadena, California, USA, with AI-agent assistance. Matthew J. Col-
brook retains authorship of the mathematical counterexample. Milan Hladík, David Daney and Elias
P. Tsigaridas retain the original question and background credit.
The eight checked exports, each with prefix NLA.IV06., are:
 • eigenvalue_determinant_semantics: genuine eigenvector and characteristic-determinant equivalence
   for every real square matrix.
 • family_and_determinant_semantics: equality with the complete endpoint box and the actual determi-
   nant polynomial.
 • witness_eigenpairs: four admissible matrices and their nonzero eigenvectors at −3, 0, 3, 25.
 • witness_separators: determinant bounds for every box member, excluding −1, 1, 12.
 • connected_component_intervals: actual equal component classes force interval containment for any
   real subset.
 • four_components: an injective map from four representatives into the genuine component quotient.
 • counterexample: admissible endpoints whose component cardinality strictly exceeds dimension
   three.
 • not_componentBoundConjecture: negation of the complete original universal claim.

Editorial ratings; a bounded search cannot certify that a problem remains unsolved.
Literature check: 2026-09-12                                                                           1
OPEN PROBLEMS IN NUMERICAL LINEAR ALGEBRA                                                            IV-06




Two independent statement approvals preceded implementation; two independent final proof refer-
ees approved the frozen proof after fresh source elaboration and actual-term checks. Ubuntu run
34725713519 matched all eight exports with the sandboxed Comparator, replayed the solution in Lean’s
default kernel and passed both actual isolation/rejection-control suites. The operational audit and orig-
inal artifacts bind all 200 candidate inputs; the separate root acceptance independently checked their
identity and actual execution. All 17 internal/public transitive axiom reports allow only propext, Clas-
sical.choice and Quot.sound. Operational and publication work does not add mathematical referees. Ex-
ternal human peer review is not claimed.
The pins are Lean 4.33.1, LeanCert 621a43d and Mathlib 0df444a. A material explicit kernel LeanCert
certificate proves −18 < 0 on a singleton; exact algebra and universal aﬀine bounds reduce every sep-
arator to this sign. Genuine connectedness and cardinality complete the argument. No eigenvalue
approximation, root isolation or interval subdivision is used. Exactly four components, complete end-
points and a replacement bound for all dimensions are outside these exports. See the project guide,
manifest, reviews and dependency pins.
From the immutable verified revision on a documented non-root Linux host, reproduce with:

tools/lean/bootstrap.sh /absolute/path/to/nla-lean-tools
tools/lean/selftest.sh /absolute/path/to/nla-lean-tools
tools/lean/verify.sh \
  intervals-and-absolute-value-equations/IV-06/lean \
  /absolute/path/to/nla-lean-tools


Problem statement

For every integer 𝑛 ≥ 1 and real matrices 𝐿, 𝑈 ∈ ℝ𝑛×𝑛 with 𝐿 ≤ 𝑈 entrywise, form the interval matrix
family

                                               𝒜 = {𝐴 ∈ ℝ𝑛×𝑛 ∶ 𝐿 ≤ 𝐴 ≤ 𝑈}.

Each entry varies independently in its prescribed closed interval; singleton intervals are allowed. Define
the set of all real eigenvalues attained by the family by

                              Λℝ (𝒜) = {𝜆 ∈ ℝ ∶ ∃𝐴 ∈ 𝒜, ∃𝑥 ∈ ℝ𝑛 ∖ {0}, 𝐴𝑥 = 𝜆𝑥}.

Must Λℝ (𝒜) have at most 𝑛 connected components? Equivalently, must there exist 0 ≤ 𝑚 ≤ 𝑛 and real
numbers 𝑎𝑟 ≤ 𝑏𝑟 , 1 ≤ 𝑟 ≤ 𝑚, such that

                                                                   𝑚
                                                     Λℝ (𝒜) = ⋃ [𝑎𝑟 , 𝑏𝑟 ]?
                                                                  𝑟=1

The empty set corresponds to 𝑚 = 0, and a singleton eigenvalue component counts as one interval.
No symmetry, diagonalizability, or reality of the entire spectrum is assumed. Only real eigenvalues
contribute to the set.
Interval eigensolvers enclose all eigenvalues allowed by uncertain matrix entries. The conjecture bounds
the number of separated real spectral regions they must represent, without claiming that their end-
points can be found eﬀiciently. Finiteness and compactness of the union are known; the proposed
linear bound is the unresolved claim. For families restricted to symmetric matrices, the ordered eigen-
value functions already give 𝑛 compact intervals, as explained in the second reference; that does not
address the family above.




Editorial ratings; a bounded search cannot certify that a problem remains unsolved.
Literature check: 2026-09-12                                                                            2
OPEN PROBLEMS IN NUMERICAL LINEAR ALGEBRA                                                                IV-06




References

Milan Hladík, David Daney, and Elias P. Tsigaridas, An algorithm for addressing the real interval eigen-
value problem, Journal of Computational and Applied Mathematics 235 (2011), 2715–2730, §1, p. 2716,
paragraph immediately after the definition of Λ.
The same authors, Characterizing and approximating eigenvalue sets of symmetric interval matrices, Comput-
ers & Mathematics with Applications 62 (2011), 3152–3163, §2, p. 3153; DOI.

Status check

On 2026-09-10, checked the published formulation, the authors’ follow-up on symmetric interval ma-
trices, Hladík’s current publication record, and searches for the original title, interval eigenvalue com-
ponents, the at-most-𝑛 claim, and 2025/2026 developments. No primary source proving or refuting the
general conjecture was located. This is a bounded literature check; papers addressing only symmetric
interval families do not settle the stated question.

Independent audit — 2026-09-10

The primary 2011 JCAM text explicitly poses the at-most-𝑛 conjecture for independent entries. The
full symmetric follow-up instead studies the coupled family 𝒜 𝑆 = {𝐴 ∈ 𝒜 ∶ 𝐴 = 𝐴𝑇 }, generally a
proper subset, as its §2 explains. Its result alone does not justify the previous partial-resolution label for
the displayed independent-entry target. Targeted later component-count and exact-conjecture searches
found no proof or counterexample; the explicit openness statement is historical.




Editorial ratings; a bounded search cannot certify that a problem remains unsolved.
Literature check: 2026-09-12                                                                                3
