OPEN PROBLEMS IN NUMERICAL LINEAR ALGEBRA                                                          MF-16




Matrix functions and stability


Uniqueness of positive definite solutions of
two-letter word equations in order two
Diﬀiculty: challenging       Importance: interesting to specialist
Status: Lean verified

Topic: Structured nonlinear matrix equations.
Rating rationale: Challenging because uniqueness must hold for words of unbounded length despite
higher-dimensional failures; specialist impact reflects the surviving two-letter, order-two setting.

Resolution — 2026-09-11

Author: Matthew J. Colbrook, Department of Applied Mathematics and Theoretical Physics, University
of Cambridge. Independent Codex-agent review: PASS for the exact target.
The ordinary symmetric two-letter word 𝑋𝐵𝑋 12 𝐵𝑋 = 𝑃 has at least three distinct real symmetric pos-
itive definite solutions for explicit integer 𝐵, 𝑃. These are also Hermitian positive definite solutions,
refuting the canonical universal uniqueness assertion in dimension two. An exact negative Jacobian
determinant and two independent interval implementations certify the counterexample.
The complete target is resolved. Its former diﬀiculty rating is historical; the original statement, refer-
ences and dated audits remain below.
Primary reference: complete authored PDF, standalone TeX, Theorem 1; Theorem 4 gives three certi-
fied solutions, and Theorem 3 gives a family threshold. Independent proof review · Authorship and
submission record. That dated manuscript review was independent agent review; the separate Lean
verification below certifies the full original target. External human peer review is not claimed.

Lean proof and verification evidence — 2026-09-12

Formalization: George Stepaniants, Department of Computing and Mathematical Sciences, California
Institute of Technology, Pasadena, California, USA, with AI-agent assistance. Matthew J. Colbrook
retains authorship of the mathematical counterexample.
The nine formal exports refute the complete original universal uniqueness assertion: all finite ordinary
two-letter palindromes containing 𝑋, and all complex Hermitian positive definite 𝐵, 𝑃 of order two. For
the unchanged source word 𝑋𝐵𝑋 12 𝐵𝑋 and integer matrices, the proof constructs two distinct genuine
positive definite solutions. Actual written-order matrix products, complexification and every matrix-
entry equality are proved. The original target and mathematical source are retained unchanged.
A single rational box of radius 10−7 is certified by the actual LeanCert Krawczyk checker in explicit
kernel mode. Cayley–Hamilton reduces the twelfth power before interval evaluation; determinant and
symmetry recover the full word equation. The soundness theorem yields an actual root, and an LDL
congruence proves positive definiteness. No numerical root approximation is assumed. The source’s
stronger three-solution count and exponent-family threshold are outside these nine exports.
Two independent statement approvals preceded proof work, and two independent final mathematical
reports approved the frozen proof. The actual Ubuntu run, at immutable revision 4e244488, passed
all 17 jobs. All nine exports matched without definition exceptions; default-kernel replay, 22 standard-
three axiom reports and both real control suites passed as a non-root user. The independent operational
audit and coordinator acceptance bind all 294 submitted inputs and the original logs/artifacts. Local
Mac checks are separately identified. The v0.4 manifest, numerical targets and proof map document
the exact scope.




Editorial ratings; a bounded search cannot certify that a problem remains unsolved.
Literature check: 2026-09-13                                                                            1
OPEN PROBLEMS IN NUMERICAL LINEAR ALGEBRA                                                             MF-16




Checked declarations, versions and reproduction

The full original target is refuted by NLA.MF16.not_wordUniquenessConjecture. All checked declarations
in namespace NLA.MF16 are listed below; their individual contracts and source correspondence are in
the proof package.
 • word_semantics
 • source_data
 • twelfth_power_reduction
 • polynomial_word_equivalence
 • krawczyk_certificate
 • certified_root
 • root_to_matrix
 • counterexample
 • not_wordUniquenessConjecture
The exact checked versions are:
 • Lean 4.33.1.
 • Mathlib: 0df444a360eaa60ab8c11dca51a86af692955474.
 • LeanCert: 621a43d7cf21f87872392a01e874f2f1dbddc926.
The dependency manifest pins all ten revisions. The successful run built the fresh project with matching
oﬀicial Mathlib cache objects; it does not claim to rebuild every dependency from source.
Use a clean checkout of the immutable verified revision linked above and a non-root Linux host with
the documented sandbox prerequisites. From the repository root:

tools/lean/bootstrap.sh /tmp/nla-mf16-check
tools/lean/selftest.sh /tmp/nla-mf16-check
tools/lean/verify.sh \
  matrix-functions-and-stability/MF-16/lean \
  /tmp/nla-mf16-check

The verifier runs the actual controls, statement comparison, permitted-axiom checks and default-kernel
replay. Its successful dated logs are linked above. A local lake build Solution is a separate development
check.

Problem statement

A word 𝑊(𝑋, 𝐵) is a finite product of letters from {𝑋, 𝐵}. It is symmetric if its sequence of letters equals
its reversal. Require at least one occurrence of 𝑋.
For every such symmetric word 𝑊 and every pair of Hermitian positive definite matrices 𝐵, 𝑃 ∈ ℂ2×2 ,
is there exactly one Hermitian positive definite matrix 𝑋 ∈ ℂ2×2 satisfying

                                                         𝑊(𝑋, 𝐵) = 𝑃?

Products are evaluated in the written order. Existence is known; uniqueness is the open assertion. This
is the ordinary two-letter word case of the surviving order-two conjecture, with no real powers or ad-
ditional fixed letters included in the statement.

Why it matters

The question concerns whether a structured nonlinear matrix equation has a single positive definite
solution branch. The elementary word 𝑋𝐵𝑋 connects this family with matrix geometric means and
Riccati equations.



Editorial ratings; a bounded search cannot certify that a problem remains unsolved.
Literature check: 2026-09-13                                                                              2
OPEN PROBLEMS IN NUMERICAL LINEAR ALGEBRA                                                          MF-16




References

 • C. J. Hillar and C. R. Johnson, Symmetric word equations in two positive definite letters, Proceedings
   of the American Mathematical Society 132 (2004), 945–953, Definition 1.1, Theorem 2.2, and Conjecture
   2.3. This gives the original two-letter existence and uniqueness formulation.
 • S. N. Armstrong and C. J. Hillar, Solvability of Symmetric Word Equations in Positive Definite Letters,
   Journal of the London Mathematical Society 76 (2007), 777–796, Theorem 1.4 and Conjecture 11.5 (p. 20
   of the arXiv PDF); Remark 11.6 discusses the real order-two case.
 • J. D. Lawson and Y. Lim, Solving symmetric matrix word equations via symmetric space machin-
   ery, Linear Algebra and its Applications 414 (2006), 560–569. Its bounded-degree uniqueness result is
   summarized in Armstrong–Hillar’s introduction.

Status check

On 2026-09-08, searched the titles, “symmetric word equations”, “Conjecture 11.5”, “2 × 2”, “two-
by-two”, “uniqueness”, “counterexample”, and 2025–2026. No order-two resolution was located.
Armstrong–Hillar refute unrestricted uniqueness in dimensions at least three, while explicitly retain-
ing the order-two conjecture; their special order-two theorem and known bounded-degree results
do not cover every word. No recent explicit reaﬀirmation was found. The statement deliberately
records the source-backed two-letter problem rather than presuming that the paper’s comments about
reducing complex matrices to real matrices cover arbitrarily many fixed letters.

Audit — 2026-09-10

Rechecked Armstrong–Hillar, Theorem 11.4 and Conjecture 11.5. The nontrivial word 𝑋𝐵𝑋 2 𝐵3 𝑋 2 𝐵𝑋 is
settled in order two, but arbitrary words remain open. Title and order-two uniqueness searches found
no full resolution. Existence alone is not the reason for the partial-resolution tag.




Editorial ratings; a bounded search cannot certify that a problem remains unsolved.
Literature check: 2026-09-13                                                                            3
