OPEN PROBLEMS IN NUMERICAL LINEAR ALGEBRA                                                                   RA-07




Randomized and low-rank approximation


Convexity of the expected error of
volume-sampled column subsets
Diﬀiculty: challenging       Importance: interesting to the community
Status: Lean verified

Rating rationale: Challenging because the required second-difference inequality goes beyond standard
log-concavity; community impact is understanding average column-selection and Nyström error.

Lean proof and verification evidence — 2026-09-12
The complete original discrete-convexity assertion is Lean verified. For every 𝑛 ≥ 3, every strictly
positive real tuple and every 2 ≤ 𝑗 ≤ 𝑛 − 1, the actual elementary-symmetric ratios satisfy 𝑓 (𝑗 − 1) −
2𝑓 (𝑗) + 𝑓 (𝑗 + 1) ≥ 0. The proof at revision bf144a8 includes repeated eigenvalues and both endpoint
indices, with no ordering or factorization assumption.
Mathematical proof: Matthew J. Colbrook, Department of Applied Mathematics and Theoretical
Physics, University of Cambridge. Lean formalization: George Stepaniants, Department of Comput-
ing and Mathematical Sciences, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, California, USA, with
AI-agent assistance.
The proof derives the full-multiplicity positive-factor representation of the actual generating-
polynomial derivative of order 𝑗 − 1. For its 𝑛 − 𝑗 + 1 ≥ 2 factors 𝜇𝑎 > 0, it proves the exact
certificate

                                                         2 ∑𝑎<𝑏 𝜇𝑎 𝜇𝑏 (𝜇𝑎 − 𝜇𝑏 )2
                    𝑓 (𝑗 − 1) − 2𝑓 (𝑗) + 𝑓 (𝑗 + 1) =                                  ≥ 0,   𝑠𝑟 = ∑ 𝜇𝑟𝑎 ,
                                                                𝑠1 (𝑠21 − 𝑠2 )                     𝑎

including strict positivity of the denominator. The six checked exports, each with prefix NLA.RA07.,
are:
 • elementary_values: actual subset-sum conventions and positivity.
 • generating_derivative_values: actual coeﬀicients and factorial-scaled derivatives.
 • positive_derivative_factorization: exact degree, real splitting and every root multiplicity.
 • power_sum_certificate: positive denominator and exact nonnegative pair identity.
 • second_difference_certificate: that identity for every original ratio and index.
 • errorSequence_convex: the complete aﬀirmative canonical theorem.
Two independent agents reviewed the statements, second statement report, completed proof and sec-
ond proof report. Linux run 34715563781 compared all six exports with the sandboxed Comparator
and replayed the solution in Lean’s default kernel. The independent operational audit and original arti-
facts bind all 123 verified inputs and the actual isolation and rejection controls. Twelve internal/public
transitive axiom checks use only propext, Classical.choice and Quot.sound. These are independent agent
reviews, without a claim of external human peer review.
The proof pins Lean 4.33.1, LeanCert 621a43d and Mathlib 0df444a. LeanCert audits kernel trust for
exact algebra and root geometry; this proof has no numerical interval certificate or approximate root
computation. See the manifest, dependency pins and exact targets. From the verified revision on a
documented non-root Linux host, reproduce with:

tools/lean/bootstrap.sh /absolute/path/to/nla-lean-tools
tools/lean/selftest.sh /absolute/path/to/nla-lean-tools
tools/lean/verify.sh \
  randomized-and-low-rank-approximation/RA-07/lean \
  /absolute/path/to/nla-lean-tools
Editorial ratings; a bounded search cannot certify that a problem remains unsolved.
Literature check: 2026-09-12                                                                                    1
OPEN PROBLEMS IN NUMERICAL LINEAR ALGEBRA                                                            RA-07




The source’s additional monotonicity, index-one, sampling-expectation and application claims are out-
side these six exports. The complete original scalar convexity target and its historical informal proof
remain below.

Resolution — 2026-09-11

Author: Matthew J. Colbrook, Department of Applied Mathematics and Theoretical Physics, University
of Cambridge. Independent Codex-agent review: PASS for the exact target.
The sequence (𝑗 + 1)𝑒𝑗+1 /𝑒𝑗 is decreasing and discretely convex for every positive spectrum, including
both endpoints. The exact second-difference certificate proves the full canonical conjecture.
The complete target is resolved. Its former diﬀiculty rating is historical; the original mathematical state-
ment and source evidence are retained below.
Primary reference: complete authored PDF, standalone TeX, Theorem 1.1. Independent proof review
· Authorship and submission record. The 2026-09-11 verification was independent agent review, with-
out external human peer review or formal certification. The later Lean verification above covers the
complete canonical scalar convexity target.
For 𝑛 ≥ 3 and positive real numbers 𝜆1 , … , 𝜆𝑛 , let

                                     𝑒𝑗 (𝜆) =      ∑      ∏ 𝜆𝑖 ,        𝑒0 = 1,       𝑒𝑛+1 = 0.
                                                𝑆⊆{1,…,𝑛} 𝑖∈𝑆
                                                  |𝑆|=𝑗


Define 𝑓 (𝑗) = (𝑗 + 1)𝑒𝑗+1 (𝜆)/𝑒𝑗 (𝜆) for 1 ≤ 𝑗 ≤ 𝑛. Is 𝑓 discretely convex, that is,

                                  𝑓 (𝑗 − 1) − 2𝑓 (𝑗) + 𝑓 (𝑗 + 1) ≥ 0          (2 ≤ 𝑗 ≤ 𝑛 − 1),

for every such 𝑛 and positive tuple 𝜆?
For a matrix 𝐴 with positive eigenvalues 𝜆𝑖 of 𝐴𝑇 𝐴, sample a set 𝑆 of 𝑗 columns with probability pro-
portional to det(𝐴𝑇
                  𝑆 𝐴𝑆 ). Its expected squared Frobenius projection error is


                                                    𝔼‖(𝐼 − 𝑃𝐴𝑆 )𝐴‖2𝐹 = 𝑓 (𝑗),

where 𝑃𝐴𝑆 is the orthogonal projector onto the selected column span. Thus the conjecture asserts a
diminishing marginal improvement in the average reconstruction error of these fixed-size determinan-
tal samples. It is distinct from optimizing a worst-case approximation factor over all matrices with a
prescribed spectrum.

References

1. M. Dereziński, R. Khanna, and M. W. Mahoney, Improved guarantees and a multiple-descent curve for
   Column Subset Selection and the Nyström method, NeurIPS 2020, arXiv:2002.09073. Section 5, Conjec-
   ture 1 is exactly the discrete-convexity statement. Paper.
2. A. Deshpande, L. Rademacher, S. S. Vempala, and G. Wang, Matrix Approximation and Projective
   Clustering via Volume Sampling, Theory of Computing 2 (2006), Article 12, pp. 225–247. See the
   volume-sampling matrix approximation results. Paper.

Status check — 2026-09-08

Searched “Derezinski Khanna Mahoney Conjecture 1 convexity”, “elementary symmetric ratio 𝑘 + 1
convexity DPP”, and the exact 2020 paper title with 2025/2026. Checked the current arXiv record. No
proof or counterexample was found. Standard Newton inequalities imply other ratio inequalities but
are not cited as a resolution of this second-difference inequality.



Editorial ratings; a bounded search cannot certify that a problem remains unsolved.
Literature check: 2026-09-12                                                                              2
OPEN PROBLEMS IN NUMERICAL LINEAR ALGEBRA                                                  RA-07




Audit — 2026-09-10

Rechecked Dereziński–Khanna–Mahoney, §5, Conjecture 1; the current record remains v3 of December
2020. Volume-sampling convexity and elementary-symmetric-ratio searches found no resolution. This
remains historical explicit conjecture evidence, supplemented by a bounded follow-up search.




Editorial ratings; a bounded search cannot certify that a problem remains unsolved.
Literature check: 2026-09-12                                                                   3
