OPEN PROBLEMS IN NUMERICAL LINEAR ALGEBRA                                                                   RA-07




Randomized and low-rank approximation


Convexity of the expected error of
volume-sampled column subsets
Diﬀiculty: challenging       Importance: interesting to the community
Status: Lean verified

Rating rationale: Challenging because the required second-difference inequality goes beyond standard
log-concavity; community impact is understanding average column-selection and Nyström error.

Lean proof and verification evidence — 2026-09-12
The complete original discrete-convexity assertion is Lean verified. The proof at revision bf144a8
covers every 𝑛 ≥ 3, strictly positive real tuple and 2 ≤ 𝑗 ≤ 𝑛 − 1, including repeated eigenvalues and
both endpoint indices, without ordering or factorization assumptions.
Mathematical proof: Matthew J. Colbrook, Department of Applied Mathematics and Theoretical
Physics, University of Cambridge. Lean formalization: George Stepaniants, Department of Comput-
ing and Mathematical Sciences, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, California, USA, with
AI-agent assistance.
The actual generating-polynomial derivative of order 𝑗 − 1 has 𝑛 − 𝑗 + 1 ≥ 2 positive reciprocal-root
factors 𝜇𝑎 , with multiplicity. The proof derives

                                                         2 ∑𝑎<𝑏 𝜇𝑎 𝜇𝑏 (𝜇𝑎 − 𝜇𝑏 )2
                    𝑓 (𝑗 − 1) − 2𝑓 (𝑗) + 𝑓 (𝑗 + 1) =                                  ≥ 0,   𝑠𝑟 = ∑ 𝜇𝑟𝑎 ,
                                                                𝑠1 (𝑠21 − 𝑠2 )                     𝑎

including strict positivity of the denominator. The six checked exports, each with prefix NLA.RA07.,
are:
 • elementary_values: actual subset-sum conventions and positivity.
 • generating_derivative_values: actual coeﬀicients and factorial-scaled derivatives.
 • positive_derivative_factorization: exact degree, real splitting and every root multiplicity.
 • power_sum_certificate: positive denominator and exact nonnegative pair identity.
 • second_difference_certificate: that identity for every original ratio and index.
 • errorSequence_convex: the complete aﬀirmative canonical theorem.
Separate pairs of independent agents approved the statements and proof. Linux run 34715563781
matched all six exports with the sandboxed Comparator and replayed the solution in Lean’s default
kernel. The operational audit and original artifacts bind 123 inputs and the isolation/rejection controls.
Twelve transitive axiom checks use only propext, Classical.choice and Quot.sound. No external human
peer review is claimed.
The pins are Lean 4.33.1, LeanCert 621a43d and Mathlib 0df444a. LeanCert audits kernel trust; there is
no numerical interval certificate or approximate root computation. See the manifest, dependency pins
and exact targets. From the verified revision on a non-root Linux host:

tools/lean/bootstrap.sh /absolute/path/to/nla-lean-tools
tools/lean/selftest.sh /absolute/path/to/nla-lean-tools
tools/lean/verify.sh \
  randomized-and-low-rank-approximation/RA-07/lean \
  /absolute/path/to/nla-lean-tools

The source’s additional monotonicity, index-one, sampling-expectation and application claims are out-
side these six exports. The complete original scalar convexity target and its historical informal proof
remain below.

Editorial ratings; a bounded search cannot certify that a problem remains unsolved.
Literature check: 2026-09-12                                                                                    1
OPEN PROBLEMS IN NUMERICAL LINEAR ALGEBRA                                                            RA-07




Resolution — 2026-09-11

Author: Matthew J. Colbrook, Department of Applied Mathematics and Theoretical Physics, University
of Cambridge. Independent Codex-agent review: PASS for the exact target.
The sequence (𝑗 + 1)𝑒𝑗+1 /𝑒𝑗 is decreasing and discretely convex for every positive spectrum, including
both endpoints. The exact second-difference certificate proves the full canonical conjecture.
The complete target is resolved. Its former diﬀiculty rating is historical; the original mathematical state-
ment and source evidence are retained below.
Primary reference: complete authored PDF, standalone TeX, Theorem 1.1. Independent proof review
· Authorship and submission record. The 2026-09-11 verification was independent agent review, with-
out external human peer review or formal certification. The later Lean verification above covers the
complete canonical scalar convexity target.
For 𝑛 ≥ 3 and positive real numbers 𝜆1 , … , 𝜆𝑛 , let

                                     𝑒𝑗 (𝜆) =      ∑      ∏ 𝜆𝑖 ,        𝑒0 = 1,       𝑒𝑛+1 = 0.
                                                𝑆⊆{1,…,𝑛} 𝑖∈𝑆
                                                  |𝑆|=𝑗


Define 𝑓 (𝑗) = (𝑗 + 1)𝑒𝑗+1 (𝜆)/𝑒𝑗 (𝜆) for 1 ≤ 𝑗 ≤ 𝑛. Is 𝑓 discretely convex, that is,

                                  𝑓 (𝑗 − 1) − 2𝑓 (𝑗) + 𝑓 (𝑗 + 1) ≥ 0          (2 ≤ 𝑗 ≤ 𝑛 − 1),

for every such 𝑛 and positive tuple 𝜆?
For a matrix 𝐴 with positive eigenvalues 𝜆𝑖 of 𝐴𝑇 𝐴, sample a set 𝑆 of 𝑗 columns with probability pro-
portional to det(𝐴𝑇
                  𝑆 𝐴𝑆 ). Its expected squared Frobenius projection error is


                                                    𝔼‖(𝐼 − 𝑃𝐴𝑆 )𝐴‖2𝐹 = 𝑓 (𝑗),

where 𝑃𝐴𝑆 is the orthogonal projector onto the selected column span. Thus the conjecture asserts a
diminishing marginal improvement in the average reconstruction error of these fixed-size determinan-
tal samples. It is distinct from optimizing a worst-case approximation factor over all matrices with a
prescribed spectrum.

References

1. M. Dereziński, R. Khanna, and M. W. Mahoney, Improved guarantees and a multiple-descent curve for
   Column Subset Selection and the Nyström method, NeurIPS 2020, arXiv:2002.09073. Section 5, Conjec-
   ture 1 is exactly the discrete-convexity statement. Paper.
2. A. Deshpande, L. Rademacher, S. S. Vempala, and G. Wang, Matrix Approximation and Projective
   Clustering via Volume Sampling, Theory of Computing 2 (2006), Article 12, pp. 225–247. See the
   volume-sampling matrix approximation results. Paper.

Status check — 2026-09-08

Searched “Derezinski Khanna Mahoney Conjecture 1 convexity”, “elementary symmetric ratio 𝑘 + 1
convexity DPP”, and the exact 2020 paper title with 2025/2026. Checked the current arXiv record. No
proof or counterexample was found. Standard Newton inequalities imply other ratio inequalities but
are not cited as a resolution of this second-difference inequality.

Audit — 2026-09-10

Rechecked Dereziński–Khanna–Mahoney, §5, Conjecture 1; the current record remains v3 of December
2020. Volume-sampling convexity and elementary-symmetric-ratio searches found no resolution. This
remains historical explicit conjecture evidence, supplemented by a bounded follow-up search.

Editorial ratings; a bounded search cannot certify that a problem remains unsolved.
Literature check: 2026-09-12                                                                              2
