OPEN PROBLEMS IN NUMERICAL LINEAR ALGEBRA                                                           TR-15




Tensor computations


Nonnegative H-eigenvalue inheritance from
odd-order Hankel tensors
Diﬀiculty: challenging       Importance: interesting to specialist
Status: Lean verified

Rating rationale: Challenging because odd-order H-eigenvalue positivity lacks the even-order
polynomial-positivity argument; specialist importance lies in transferring spectral certificates within
Hankel representations.

Lean proof and verification evidence - 2026-09-12

The complete odd-order inheritance conjecture is false, with a Lean-verified counterexample. The
proof at revision 6a2d086 uses 𝑚 = 3, 𝑞 = 2, 𝑛 = 2 and the shared generator ℎ = (2, 0, 1, 0, 2, 0, −1).
Every real H-eigenvalue of the lower tensor is strictly positive, while the upper tensor has the exact
H-eigenpair (−1, (0, 1)).
Mathematical counterexample and informal proof: Matthew J. Colbrook, Department of Applied
Mathematics and Theoretical Physics, University of Cambridge. Lean formalization: George Stepa-
niants, Department of Computing and Mathematical Sciences, California Institute of Technology,
Pasadena, California, USA, with AI-agent assistance.
The definitions retain every original odd 𝑚 ≥ 3, integer 𝑞 ≥ 2, dimension 𝑛 ≥ 2 and real common gen-
erator. They use the actual Hankel entries, every ordered contraction tuple, signed coordinate powers
and nonzero real H-eigenvectors. The seven checked exports, each with prefix NLA.TR15., are:
 • lower_contractions: all three exact component polynomials for every real vector.
 • upper_contraction: the actual order-six contraction at (0, 1).
 • lower_eigenvalues_pos: positivity of every lower real H-eigenvalue.
 • lower_eigenpair_exists: a genuine nonzero lower pair from the intermediate value theorem.
 • upper_negative_eigenpair: the complete upper pair and strict negative eigenvalue.
 • counterexample: original admissibility, the lower premise and failure of the upper conclusion.
 • not_inheritanceConjecture: negation of the complete universal inheritance assertion.
Lower positivity follows from the first contraction, a strictly positive sum of squares. The upper con-
traction has one surviving ordered tuple. An actual intermediate-value root supplies the lower pair; its
existence is proved without adding a premise or a strong-Hankel hypothesis.
Two independent agents approved the statements and completed proof. Linux run 34716902324
matched all seven exports with the sandboxed Comparator and replayed the solution in Lean’s
default kernel. The original artifacts and independent audit bind all 135 input hashes and both actual
isolation/rejection-control suites. All 15 internal/public transitive axiom reports use only propext,
Classical.choice and Quot.sound. These are independent agent reviews, without a claim of external
human peer review.
The proof pins Lean 4.33.1, LeanCert 621a43d and Mathlib 0df444a. The kernel-mode LeanCert certifi-
cate −1 < 0 remains in the final negative-pair contradiction. See the manifest, dependency pins and
exact targets. From the verified revision on a documented non-root Linux host, reproduce with:

tools/lean/bootstrap.sh /absolute/path/to/nla-lean-tools
tools/lean/selftest.sh /absolute/path/to/nla-lean-tools
tools/lean/verify.sh \
  tensor-computations/TR-15/lean \
  /absolute/path/to/nla-lean-tools


Editorial ratings; a bounded search cannot certify that a problem remains unsolved.
Literature check: 2026-09-12                                                                            1
OPEN PROBLEMS IN NUMERICAL LINEAR ALGEBRA                                                                     TR-15




Resolution — 2026-09-11

Negative resolution. Matthew J. Colbrook’s complete manuscript, Counterexample proposition and
proof disproves the universal conjecture with 𝑚 = 3, 𝑞 = 2, 𝑛 = 2 and the common generating vector
ℎ = (2, 0, 1, 0, 2, 0, −1). Every real H-eigenvalue of the order-three, dimension-three tensor 𝐴 is strictly
positive, whereas the order-six, dimension-two tensor 𝐵 has the exact H-eigenpair (−1, (0, 1)). The
manuscript also proves that 𝐴 has a real H-eigenpair, so its premise is nonvacuous. The counterexample
meets the original odd-lower-order assumptions; it does not contradict the separate even-lower-order
theorem or results requiring a positive-semidefinite associated Hankel matrix.
The complete source passed independent Codex-agent proof review. Authorship, AI assistance and
verification record. The 2026-09-11 review did not assert external human peer review or formal verifica-
tion. The later Lean verification above covers the complete original implication and proves the premise
is nonvacuous. The original target below is retained verbatim; the diﬀiculty, importance and rating
rationale above are historical. This entry no longer contributes to the open count.
Manuscript PDF.

Statement

For every odd 𝑚 ≥ 3, integer 𝑞 ≥ 2, dimension 𝑛 ≥ 2, and vector ℎ ∈ ℝ𝑞𝑚(𝑛−1)+1 , define Hankel tensors
𝐴 and 𝐵 with this same generating vector. Their orders and dimensions are

                 order(𝐴) = 𝑚,         dim(𝐴) = 𝑞(𝑛 − 1) + 1,                  order(𝐵) = 𝑞𝑚,   dim(𝐵) = 𝑛.

An order-𝑠, dimension-𝑁 Hankel tensor has entry ℎ𝑖1 +⋯+𝑖𝑠 −𝑠 , with each index in {1, … , 𝑁}.
For a real order-𝑠 tensor 𝐶, an H-eigenvalue is a real 𝜆 admitting a real nonzero vector 𝑥 such that, for
every 𝑖,

                                                  𝑁
                                                 ∑          𝐶𝑖𝑖2 ⋯𝑖𝑠 𝑥𝑖2 ⋯ 𝑥𝑖𝑠 = 𝜆𝑥𝑖𝑠−1 .
                                              𝑖2 ,…,𝑖𝑠 =1

Conjecture: if 𝐴 has no negative H-eigenvalues, then 𝐵 has no negative H-eigenvalues.

Relevance

The question transfers a spectral positivity certificate between different Hankel representations of the
same data, relevant to structured tensor eigenvalue computation and polynomial positivity.

References

1. W. Ding, L. Qi, and Y. Wei, Inheritance properties and sum-of-squares decomposition of Hankel tensors:
   theory and algorithms, BIT Numer. Math. 57 (2017), 169–190. DOI; author PDF, final §4, “The third
   inheritance property of Hankel tensors,” concluding conjecture; §2 gives order/dimension conven-
   tions.
2. L. Qi, Hankel Tensors: Associated Hankel Matrices and Vandermonde Decomposition, 2014. Primary
   preprint, §5, concerning H-eigenvalues and complete Hankel tensors.

Status check — 2026-09-10

Rechecked the Ding–Qi–Wei journal text, final §4, and searched for proofs or counterexamples to the
third inheritance property. The source explicitly leaves odd lower order unresolved; its even-lower-
order result lies outside the displayed target. Complete or strong Hankel hypotheses would be addi-
tional restrictions. No later resolution was located; this remains a bounded historical-source check.




Editorial ratings; a bounded search cannot certify that a problem remains unsolved.
Literature check: 2026-09-12                                                                                      2
