OPEN PROBLEMS IN NUMERICAL LINEAR ALGEBRA                                                            IS-03




Eigenvalues and inverse problems


Johnson’s derivative-realizability conjecture
Diﬀiculty: challenging       Importance: interesting to the community
Status: Lean verified

Rating rationale: Challenging reflects preserving nonnegative realizability under polynomial differ-
entiation; community impact connects the nonnegative inverse eigenvalue problem with polynomial
critical points.

Resolution — 2026-09-11
Negative resolution by Matthew J. Colbrook, Department of Applied Mathematics and Theoretical
Physics, University of Cambridge. Complete manuscript · PDF · LaTeX. Theorem 1 and equations (1)–
(7).
The nonnegative real order-seven matrix 𝐴 = diag(1/2, 𝐶2 , 𝐶4 ) has a normalized characteristic-
polynomial derivative whose seventh power sum is −8593/823543 < 0. Every power of a nonnegative
matrix has nonnegative trace, so the derivative cannot be realized at order six, or after any zero padding.
Reducibility and positive trace are allowed in the original target. This refutes its universal assertion.
The complete argument received an independent Codex-agent PASS on 11 September 2026. The re-
view report records the exact scope and a hash of the original reviewed manuscript. The mathematical
sections remain unchanged in the authored version. Original ChatGPT generation is disclosed; that
dated agent review was informal. The later Lean verification is documented below; external human
peer review is not claimed. Submission and verification record.
The original statement, source references and prior audit notes are retained; the former diﬀiculty rating
is historical.

Lean proof and verification evidence - 2026-09-12
The complete original derivative-realizability conjecture is Lean verified with a negative answer.
The proof at revision f87375f proves that the unchanged nonnegative order-seven source matrix has no
entrywise-nonnegative realization of its normalized characteristic-polynomial derivative at order six.
The full original quantifiers and exact order 𝑛 − 1 are retained. Neither symmetry nor diagonalizability
is assumed; entrywise nonnegativity is not replaced by positive semidefiniteness.
Lean formalization: George Stepaniants, Department of Computing and Mathematical Sciences, Cal-
ifornia Institute of Technology, Pasadena, California, USA, with AI-agent assistance. Matthew J. Col-
brook retains mathematical counterexample authorship. Johnson and Hoover, McCormick, Paparella
and Thrall retain the original conjecture and source attribution.
The seven checked exports, each with prefix NLA.IS03., are:
 • nonnegative_power_trace: every natural power of an entrywise-nonnegative real matrix has nonneg-
   ative entries and trace, including order and power zero.
 • witness_admissible: the actual source matrix is entrywise nonnegative and has trace 1/2.
 • witness_polynomials: its genuine characteristic polynomial and normalized derivative have the stated
   coeﬀicients; the derivative is monic of degree six.
 • trace_moment_certificate: every real order-six matrix with that characteristic polynomial has all seven
   prescribed power traces, without a spectral assumption.
 • negative_moment: the seventh value is exactly −8593/823543 and strictly negative.
 • counterexample: the admissible source matrix has no nonnegative order-six realization of its actual
   normalized derivative.
 • not_derivativeRealizabilityConjecture: negation of the complete original universal assertion.
Two independent statement approvals preceded implementation; two independent final proof refer-
ees approved the frozen proof after fresh source elaboration, actual-term inspection and replay of the

Editorial ratings; a bounded search cannot certify that a problem remains unsolved.
Literature check: 2026-09-12                                                                             1
OPEN PROBLEMS IN NUMERICAL LINEAR ALGEBRA                                                            IS-03




retained numerical checker. Ubuntu run 34728101436 matched all seven exports with the sandboxed
Comparator, replayed the solution in Lean’s default kernel and passed both actual isolation/rejection-
control suites. The operational audit and original artifacts bind all 303 submitted inputs; root acceptance
independently checked their identity and actual execution. All 18 internal/public transitive axiom re-
ports allow only propext, Classical.choice and Quot.sound. Operational and publication roles do not add
mathematical referees. External human peer review is not claimed.
The pins are Lean 4.33.1, LeanCert 621a43d and Mathlib 0df444a. The material explicit kernel LeanCert
certificate proves the singleton sign −8593/823543 < 0. Exact characteristic-polynomial, spectral, Vi-
eta/Newton and trace arguments connect that sign to the full contradiction. Separability and an actual
eigenbasis of any potential realization are derived, not assumed. No approximate roots, numerical
eigensolver or interval subdivision is used. The source’s stronger zero-padding exclusion and its sepa-
rate Monov consequence are outside these seven exports. See the project guide, manifest, reviews and
pins.
From the immutable verified revision on a documented non-root Linux host, reproduce with:

tools/lean/bootstrap.sh /absolute/path/to/nla-lean-tools
tools/lean/selftest.sh /absolute/path/to/nla-lean-tools
tools/lean/verify.sh \
  eigenvalues-and-inverse-problems/IS-03/lean \
  /absolute/path/to/nla-lean-tools


Problem statement

For every integer 𝑛 ≥ 5 and every real entrywise-nonnegative matrix 𝐴 ∈ ℝ𝑛×𝑛 , define 𝑝𝐴 (𝑧) = det(𝑧𝐼 −
𝐴). Must there exist an entrywise-nonnegative 𝐵 ∈ ℝ(𝑛−1)×(𝑛−1) such that

                                                       1 ′
                                    det(𝑧𝐼 − 𝐵) =       𝑝 (𝑧)         as polynomials in 𝑧?
                                                       𝑛 𝐴
Equivalently, the critical points of the characteristic polynomial, counted with multiplicity, would them-
selves form a realizable spectrum of the smaller order. Neither 𝐴 nor 𝐵 is assumed symmetric or diago-
nalizable. The realization must have exactly order 𝑛 − 1; allowing arbitrary additional zero eigenvalues
changes the problem. This would provide a dimension-reduction operation for nonnegative spectral
realization.




Editorial ratings; a bounded search cannot certify that a problem remains unsolved.
Literature check: 2026-09-12                                                                             2
OPEN PROBLEMS IN NUMERICAL LINEAR ALGEBRA                                                                 IS-03




References

Hoover, McCormick, Paparella, and Thrall, On the realizability of the critical points of a realizable list, Con-
jecture 1.2, p. 2, and §6. The paper credits the conjecture to Johnson and records the Cronin–Laffey
low-order results.

Earlier status check — 2026-09-08

Searches for Johnson conjecture derivative nonnegative matrix characteristic polynomial proof counterexample,
1712.05454 2026, and Monov conjecture solved found no general resolution. The source proves several
classes and records the solved cases 𝑛 ≤ 4, and 𝑛 ≤ 6 with tr 𝐴 = 0. Nonnegative power sums alone are
a different hypothesis. Monov’s weaker moment conjecture is not separately counted here.

Audit update — 2026-09-10

Rechecked the primary manuscript, Conjecture 1.2 and its proved families; the journal version is LAA
555 (2018), 301–313. Results for Ciarlet/Suleĭmanova lists, appropriate companion-matrix realizations,
and trace-zero lists of orders five and six settle substantive portions of the displayed target. Johnson-
conjecture/critical-point searches found no general proof or counterexample.




Editorial ratings; a bounded search cannot certify that a problem remains unsolved.
Literature check: 2026-09-12                                                                                  3
