OPEN PROBLEMS IN NUMERICAL LINEAR ALGEBRA                                                                FR-12




Frames and matrix designs


Counting real Hadamard matrices
Diﬀiculty: extreme       Importance: interesting to the community
Status: Lean verified

Topic: Enumeration of orthogonal sign matrices
Rating rationale: Known general upper bounds still have a quadratic exponent, while the conjecture
asks for an exponent of order 𝑛 log 𝑛. The question concerns the abundance of exact flat orthogonal
transforms, with connections to structured matrix constructions and elimination.

Negative resolution - 2026-09-12

Author: George Stepaniants, Department of Computing and Mathematical Sciences, California Institute
of Technology, Pasadena, California, USA.
The counting conjecture is false. The complete proof, Lemma 1 and Theorem 1, constructs an injection
from two labeled order-𝑚 Hadamard matrices and a perfect matching of 2𝑚 row labels. It gives

                                                                                𝑘
                        𝐻(2𝑚) ≥ (2𝑚 − 1)!! 𝐻(𝑚)2 ,                𝐻(2𝑘 ) ≥ 2 2 (𝑘−1)(𝑘−2)/8   (𝑘 ≥ 2).

The resulting exponent has order 𝑛(log 𝑛)2 along powers of two, contradicting every bound 2𝐶𝑛 log2 𝑛
with fixed 𝐶. Proof PDF · Standalone proof TeX.
The full argument passed a separate independent Codex-agent mathematical and source-scope review.
The submission record preserves the supplied source, exact checks, document conversion and bounded
public fork/branch/PR and literature search. Substantial AI assistance is disclosed. That review was
informal and did not assert external human peer review or formal verification; the later Lean verification
is documented below.
Ferber, Jain and Zhao retain attribution for the conjecture and prior upper bound. This result does not
settle existence at every admissible order or determine a matching upper bound for the count. The
original statement and historical context below are retained; the diﬀiculty and importance ratings are
historical.

Lean proof and verification evidence - 2026-09-12

The complete original counting conjecture has a Lean-verified negative answer. The proof at revi-
sion 3e20bae counts actual labeled real Hadamard matrices, proves the count finite, and refutes every
proposed positive real constant. Mathematical proof and Lean formalization: George Stepaniants,
Department of Computing and Mathematical Sciences, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena,
California, USA, with substantial AI-agent assistance.
The formal construction uses top-to-bottom pairings indexed by a permutation and proves

                                             𝑚! 𝐻(𝑚)2 ≤ 𝐻(2𝑚)               (𝑚 ≥ 1).

This smaller family yields the identical quantitative power-of-two lower bound above and the full origi-
nal negation. The stronger informal factor (2𝑚−1)!! is outside the Lean exports. The formal count has
no quotient, normalization or assumed family size; in positive dimension its matrix predicate is proved
equivalent to Mathlib’s Matrix.IsHadamard.
The seven checked exports, each with prefix NLA.FR12., are:
 • counting_semantics: genuine finite counting and the Mathlib Hadamard bridge.
 • injective_doubling: every constructed output is Hadamard and the map is injective.
 • factorial_doubling: the cardinality recurrence for every positive order.

Editorial ratings; a bounded search cannot certify that a problem remains unsolved.
Literature check: 2026-09-12                                                                                 1
OPEN PROBLEMS IN NUMERICAL LINEAR ALGEBRA                                                            FR-12




 • power_two_nonempty: existence at every power of two, including order one.
 • power_two_lower_bound: the exact source lower bound at every 𝐾 ≥ 2.
 • counterexample: a strict violation for every positive real proposed constant.
 • not_countingConjecture: negation of the complete original universal assertion.
Two independent agents approved the statements and completed proof. Linux run 34718277411
matched all seven exports with the sandboxed Comparator and replayed the solution in Lean’s default
kernel. The original artifacts and independent operational audit bind all 137 input files and both
actual isolation/rejection-control suites. All 14 internal/public transitive axiom checks use only propext,
Classical.choice and Quot.sound. These are independent agent reviews; external human peer review is
not claimed.
The pins are Lean 4.33.1, LeanCert 621a43d and Mathlib 0df444a. LeanCert audits the exact proof’s
kernel trust; there is no numerical interval certificate. Symbolic injection and direct exponential induc-
tion avoid large enumerations or approximate logarithms. See the manifest, dependency pins and exact
targets. From the immutable verified revision on a documented non-root Linux host, reproduce with:

tools/lean/bootstrap.sh /absolute/path/to/nla-lean-tools
tools/lean/selftest.sh /absolute/path/to/nla-lean-tools
tools/lean/verify.sh \
  frames-and-matrix-designs/FR-12/lean \
  /absolute/path/to/nla-lean-tools

Statement
For each positive integer 𝑛, let

                                         𝐻(𝑛) = #{𝐴 ∈ {−1, 1}𝑛×𝑛 ∶ 𝐴𝐴T = 𝑛𝐼𝑛 }.

Conjecture. There is an absolute constant 𝐶 > 0 such that

                                                        𝐻(𝑛) ≤ 2𝐶𝑛 log2 𝑛

for every positive integer 𝑛 divisible by four.
The count is of individual matrices with their row and column labels. Matrices related by signed per-
mutations are not identified. The statement does not require that a Hadamard matrix exist at every
such order.

Known bounds and numerical significance
                                                                                      2
Ferber, Jain and Zhao prove that some absolute 𝑐𝐻 > 0 gives 𝐻(𝑛) ≤ 2(1−𝑐𝐻 )𝑛 /2 for every suﬀiciently
large multiple of four. Whenever 𝐻(𝑛) > 0, distinct row permutations of one Hadamard matrix give
𝐻(𝑛) ≥ 𝑛!. Thus the conjectured exponent has the smallest possible order along orders admitting such
matrices.
Dividing a Hadamard matrix by √𝑛 produces an orthogonal transformation whose entries all have the
same magnitude. The enumeration asks how many exact sign designs can underlie these transforms.
Peca-Medlin’s work connects Hadamard enumeration for butterfly constructions to structured orthog-
onal matrices and Gaussian elimination. This is distinct from the Hadamard existence conjecture and
from bounds on elimination growth for a given matrix.

References and status check
 • A. Ferber, V. Jain and Y. Zhao, On the number of Hadamard matrices via anti-concentration, Combina-
   torics, Probability and Computing 31 (2022), 455–477. DOI; published PDF. Conjecture 1.3 on p.456
   is the displayed target; Theorem 1.2 gives the upper bound. The arXiv record also supplies the
   earlier manuscript, where the conjecture has different numbering.

Editorial ratings; a bounded search cannot certify that a problem remains unsolved.
Literature check: 2026-09-12                                                                             2
OPEN PROBLEMS IN NUMERICAL LINEAR ALGEBRA                                                          FR-12




 • BIRS workshop 24w5204 report (2024), Conjecture 28, restates the enumeration target.
 • J. Peca-Medlin, Complete pivoting growth of butterfly matrices and butterfly Hadamard matrices (2026).
   DOI, §3 before Proposition 3.1, discusses the general count as conjectural and enumerates specific
   butterfly constructions.
On 2026-09-11, checked the published statement and later restatements, and searched the exact title, the
authors’ names, Hadamard enumeration, upper bounds, and 2025–2026 proof/counterexample combi-
nations. No full resolution was located. The butterfly counts apply to restricted families and do not
settle this all-matrix upper bound. This is a bounded literature check.




Editorial ratings; a bounded search cannot certify that a problem remains unsolved.
Literature check: 2026-09-12                                                                           3
