OPEN PROBLEMS IN NUMERICAL LINEAR ALGEBRA                                                            RA-08




Randomized and low-rank approximation


Concave-function transfer of spectral low-rank
error
Diﬀiculty: challenging       Importance: interesting to the community
Status: Lean verified

Rating rationale: Challenging because scalar concavity must control noncommuting spectral errors;
community impact is reusing low-rank approximations across matrix functions.
Topic: Low-rank approximation of matrix functions.

Resolution — 2026-09-11

Author: Matthew J. Colbrook, Department of Applied Mathematics and Theoretical Physics, University
of Cambridge. Independent Codex-agent review: PASS for the exact target.
A rational positive definite 6 × 6 matrix and its exact rank-three Nyström approximation attain the
optimal input spectral error but violate transformed optimality for 𝑓 (𝑥) = min(𝑥, 1). At 𝑡 = 1/65536,
the output ratio is at least 1 + 334583/15769728. Since the input excess is zero, this also excludes every
finite factor 1 + 𝐶𝜀 for that scalar-concave class.
The complete target is resolved. Its former diﬀiculty rating is historical; the original mathematical state-
ment and source evidence are retained below.
Primary reference: complete authored PDF, standalone TeX, Theorem 3.1. Independent proof review ·
Authorship and submission record. That dated manuscript review was independent agent review; the
separate Lean verification below certifies the full original target. External human peer review is not
claimed.

Lean proof and verification evidence — 2026-09-13

Formalization: George Stepaniants, Department of Computing and Mathematical Sciences, California
Institute of Technology, Pasadena, California, USA, with AI-agent assistance. Matthew J. Colbrook
retains authorship of the mathematical counterexample.
The fourteen formal exports refute the complete original implication for all real symmetric PSD pairs, ad-
missible concave functions, original dimensions/ranks/error parameters and permitted ordered eigen-
bases. The formal definitions use the genuine Euclidean operator norm and Mathlib continuous func-
tional calculus. Truncations use the same selected eigenvectors, including repeated eigenspaces; admis-
sibility allows 𝑓 (0) > 0. Existence of ordered spectral data and their actual CFC and norm meanings
are proved.
For the unchanged six-dimensional source witness with 𝑡 = 1/65536 and 𝑓 (𝑥) = min(𝑥, 1), the input
residual and both optimal tails equal 𝑡, whereas the transformed error is strictly larger. Exact com-
pression, a degree-six polynomial minorant, genuine CFC order and a Rayleigh bound reduce the con-
tradiction to a rational positive gap. The materially used LeanCert checker proves strict positivity in
explicit kernel mode on a singleton; no interval subdivision or numerical spectral enclosure is needed.
The source’s larger contour-method ratio, separate Nyström sketch identity and ancillary nuclear-norm
extensions are outside these fourteen exports.
Two independent statement approvals preceded implementation, and two independent final mathe-
matical reports approved the complete frozen proof. The actual Ubuntu run at immutable revision
de6513d7 passed all 17 jobs. All fourteen exports matched without definition exceptions; default-kernel
replay, 59 standard-three axiom reports and both real control suites passed as a non-root user. The in-
dependent operational audit and coordinator acceptance bind all 613 submitted inputs and original ev-
idence. Local Mac checks are separately identified. The v0.4 manifest, numerical targets and proof map
document the verified scope. The original mathematical statement and sources below are unchanged.

Editorial ratings; a bounded search cannot certify that a problem remains unsolved.
Literature check: 2026-09-13                                                                              1
OPEN PROBLEMS IN NUMERICAL LINEAR ALGEBRA                                                                  RA-08




Checked declarations, versions and reproduction

The full original target is refuted by NLA.RA08.not_concaveSpectralTransferConjecture. All checked decla-
rations in namespace NLA.RA08 are listed below; their individual contracts and source correspondence
are in the proof package.
 • orderedSpectral_exists, orderedSpectral_semantics
 • functionalCalculus_spectral, spectral_tail_norms
 • operator_rayleigh_bound, witness_data
 • witness_spectral_location, minorant_scalar
 • minorant_functional_calculus, witness_tail_data
 • witness_rational_certificate, numerical_gap_positive
 • counterexample, not_concaveSpectralTransferConjecture
The exact checked versions are:
 • Lean 4.33.1.
 • Mathlib: 0df444a360eaa60ab8c11dca51a86af692955474.
 • LeanCert: 621a43d7cf21f87872392a01e874f2f1dbddc926.
The dependency manifest pins all ten revisions. The successful run built the fresh project with matching
oﬀicial Mathlib cache objects; it does not claim to rebuild every dependency from source.
Use a clean checkout of the immutable verified revision linked above and a non-root Linux host with
the documented sandbox prerequisites. From the repository root:

tools/lean/bootstrap.sh /tmp/nla-ra08-check
tools/lean/selftest.sh /tmp/nla-ra08-check
tools/lean/verify.sh \
  randomized-and-low-rank-approximation/RA-08/lean \
  /tmp/nla-ra08-check

The verifier runs the actual controls, statement comparison, permitted-axiom checks and default-kernel
replay. Its successful dated logs are linked above. A local lake build Solution is a separate development
check.

Problem statement

Let 𝑛 ≥ 2, 1 ≤ 𝑘 < 𝑛, and 𝐴, 𝐴̂ ∈ ℝ𝑛×𝑛 satisfy 𝐴 ⪰ 𝐴  ̂ ⪰ 0, where the matrices are symmetric and ⪰ is
the positive semidefinite ordering. Let 𝑓 ∶ [0, ∞) → [0, ∞) be continuous, concave, and nondecreasing.
              𝑛
For 𝑋 = ∑𝑖=1 𝜆𝑖 𝑞𝑖 𝑞𝑇
                    𝑖 with orthonormal 𝑞𝑖 and 𝜆1 ≥ ⋯ ≥ 𝜆𝑛 ≥ 0, set

                                  𝑘                         𝑛                             𝑘
                         𝑋𝑘 = ∑ 𝜆𝑖 𝑞𝑖 𝑞𝑇
                                       𝑖 ,       𝑓 (𝑋) = ∑ 𝑓 (𝜆𝑖 )𝑞𝑖 𝑞𝑇
                                                                      𝑖 ,      𝑓 (𝑋)𝑘 = ∑ 𝑓 (𝜆𝑖 )𝑞𝑖 𝑞𝑇
                                                                                                     𝑖 .
                                 𝑖=1                       𝑖=1                           𝑖=1

Use the same eigenvectors for the two truncations, allowing any choice within repeated eigenspaces.
For every 𝜀 ≥ 0, does

                                                    ̂𝑘 ‖2 ≤ (1 + 𝜀)‖𝐴 − 𝐴𝑘 ‖2
                                               ‖𝐴 − 𝐴

imply

                                                   ̂ 𝑘 ‖2 ≤ (1 + 𝜀)‖𝑓 (𝐴) − 𝑓 (𝐴)𝑘 ‖2 ?
                                       ‖𝑓 (𝐴) − 𝑓 (𝐴)

Here ‖ ⋅ ‖2 is the spectral norm. The question concerns every such matrix pair, function, and choice
of eigendecompositions. It would allow spectral approximation guarantees to pass through a wider
family of scalar functions without requiring matrix-vector products with 𝑓 (𝐴).

Editorial ratings; a bounded search cannot certify that a problem remains unsolved.
Literature check: 2026-09-13                                                                                   2
OPEN PROBLEMS IN NUMERICAL LINEAR ALGEBRA                                                           RA-08




References

1. D. Persson, R. A. Meyer, and C. Musco, Algorithm-agnostic low-rank approximation of operator
   monotone matrix functions, SIAM Journal on Matrix Analysis and Applications 46 (2025), 1–21. Table
   1, operator-norm/concave/ordered cell, explicitly labels this open; §5 reiterates it. Equation (2) fixes
   the truncation convention; Theorem 2.7 proves the operator-monotone case.
2. D. Persson, T. Chen, and C. Musco, Randomized block-Krylov subspace methods for low-rank ap-
   proximation of matrix functions, Linear Algebra and its Applications 741 (2026), 32–65. Abstract and
   algorithmic error analysis concern specific Krylov approximants rather than this universal implica-
   tion.

Status check — 2026-09-08

Checked the first paper’s latest listed arXiv v2 (2024-07-04), its 2025 journal record, Table 1, and §5.
Searches for the title with “concave”, “counterexample”, “funNyström”, and 2026 found no resolution.
The related 2026 Krylov paper was inspected for scope and did not supply this implication. The source’s
operator-norm counterexample drops the ordering assumption and therefore does not refute the state-
ment here. No explicit reaﬀirmation later than the 2025 publication was located. The matrix field here
follows the source’s real symmetric setting, rather than the attachment’s broader Hermitian convention.

Audit — 2026-09-10

Rechecked Table 1 and Theorem 2.7: the ordered operator-monotone subclass is proved, but the larger
concave class remains open. Concave-transfer and later matrix-function searches found no general res-
olution. The source’s unordered counterexample does not refute this target.




Editorial ratings; a bounded search cannot certify that a problem remains unsolved.
Literature check: 2026-09-13                                                                             3
